# Research

## Working Papers
[Big Sisters](https://www.cgdev.org/publication/big-sisters)  
**_CGD Working Paper 559 (October 2020)_**  
_Joint with Owen Ozier, Lia C.H. Fernald, and Heather Knauer_  
<div style="text-align: right"> **Media** </div>

## Publications  
[How Soon Is Now?  Evidence of Present Bias from Convex Time Budget Experiments](EXEX-BalakrishnanHaushoferJakiela-CTB.pdf)  
**_Experimental Economics, 2020, 23: 294-321_**  
_Joint with Uttara Balakrishnan and Johannes Haushofer_  
<details><summary>Abstract</summary>Empirically observed intertemporal choices about money have long been thought to exhibit present bias, i.e. higher short-term compared to long-term discount rates. Recently, this view has been called into question on both empirical and theoretical grounds, and a spate of recent findings suggest that present bias for money is minimal or non-existent when one allows for curvature in the utility function and transaction costs are tightly controlled. However, an alternative interpretation of many of these findings is that, in the interest of equalizing transaction costs across earlier and later payments, small delays were introduced between the time of the experiment and the soonest payment. We conduct a laboratory experiment in Kenya in which we elicit time and risk preference parameters from 494 participants, using convex time budgets and tightly controlling for transaction costs. We vary whether same-day payments are made immediately after the experimental session or at the close of the business day. Using the Kenyan mobile money system M-Pesa to make real-time transfers to subjects' phones allows us to make the soonest payments truly immediate. We find strong evidence of present bias, with estimates of the present bias parameter ranging from 0.902 to 0.924 - but only when same-day payments are made immediately after the experiment. This result suggests that present bias for money does in fact exist, but only for truly immediate payments.
</details>  

<br>
[Enhancing Young Children's Language Acquisition Through Parent-Child Book Sharing: a Randomized Trial in Rural Kenya](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0885200619300031?token=1F2F65360247614DE641216A687BF6FBCB686DE10A672999342CF31DF27B5E7DB348624A0CC87FD6A6528E06CDD2E8FE)  
**_Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 2020, 1(1):  179-190_**  
_Joint with Lia C.H. Fernald, Heather A. Knauer, and Owen Ozier_  
<details>
<summary>Abstract</summary>
Worldwide, 250 million children under five (43%) are not meeting their developmental potential because they lack adequate nutrition and cognitive stimulation in early childhood. Several parent support programs have shown significant benefits for children’s development, but the programs are often expensive and resource intensive. The objective of this study was to test several variants of a potentially scalable, cost-effective intervention to increase cognitive stimulation by parents and improve emergent literacy skills in children. The intervention was a modified dialogic reading training program that used culturally and linguistically appropriate books adapted for a low-literacy population. We used a cluster randomized controlled trial with four intervention arms and one control arm in a sample of caregivers (n=357) and their 24- to 83-month-old children (n=510) in rural Kenya. The first treatment group received storybooks, while the other treatment arms received storybooks paired with varying quantities of modified dialogic reading training for parents. Main effects of each arm of the trial were examined, and tests of heterogeneity were conducted to examine differential effects among children of illiterate vs. literate caregivers. Parent training paired with the provision of culturally appropriate children’s books increased reading frequency and improved the quality of caregiver-child reading interactions among preschool-aged children. Treatments involving training improved storybook-specific expressive vocabulary. The children of illiterate caregivers benefited at least as much as the children of literate caregivers. For some outcomes, effects were comparable; for other outcomes, there were differentially larger effects for children of illiterate caregivers.
</details>  

<br>
[Multilingual Assessment of Early Child Development:  Analyses from Repeated Observations of Children in Kenya](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/desc.12875)  
**_Developmental Science, Developmental Science, 2019, 22(5): e12875_**  
_Joint with Lia Fernald, Patricia Kariger, Heather Knauer, and Owen Ozier_  
> In many low‐ and middle‐income countries, young children learn a mother tongue or indigenous language at home before entering the formal education system where they will need to understand and speak a country's official language(s). Thus, assessments of children before school age, conducted in a nation's official language, may not fully reflect a child's development, underscoring the importance of test translation and adaptation. To examine differences in vocabulary development by language of assessment, we adapted and validated instruments to measure developmental outcomes, including expressive and receptive vocabulary. We assessed 505 2‐to‐6‐year‐old children in rural communities in Western Kenya with comparable vocabulary tests in three languages: Luo (the local language or mother tongue), Swahili, and English (official languages) at two time points, 5–6 weeks apart, between September 2015 and October 2016. Younger children responded to the expressive vocabulary measure exclusively in Luo (44%–59% of 2‐to‐4‐year‐olds) much more frequently than did older children (20%–21% of 5‐to‐6‐year‐olds). Baseline receptive vocabulary scores in Luo (β = 0.26, SE = 0.05, p < 0.001) and Swahili (β = 0.10, SE = 0.05, p = 0.032) were strongly associated with receptive vocabulary in English at follow‐up, even after controlling for English vocabulary at baseline. Parental Luo literacy at baseline (β = 0.11, SE = 0.05, p = 0.045) was associated with child English vocabulary at follow‐up, while parental English literacy at baseline was not. Our findings suggest that multilingual testing is essential to understanding the developmental environment and cognitive growth of multilingual children.

